Cluster Virtualization docs for v23.2+ [DOC-8143][DOC-8637][DOC-6794][DOC-8257][DOC-8268][DOC-8012][DOC-8150][DOC-8527][DOC-8521][DOC-8522][DOC-6795][DOC-6801][DOC-8523][DOC-8525][DOC-6691][DOC-8007][DOC-8530][DOC-8531][DOC-6804][DOC-8533][DOC-8190] (#17816)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/v23.2/work-with-virtual-clusters.md

"postgresql://root@{node IP or hostname}:26257/?options=-ccluster=application&sslmode=verify-full" \
--certs-dir "certs"
~~~

#### Connect to the system interface

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}
You should only connect to the system interface for cluster administration. To work with databases, tables, or workloads, connect to the application virtual cluster.
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

To connect to the system interface, pass the `options=-ccluster=system` parameter in the URL. You must have the `admin` role on the system interface.

For example, to connect to the system interface using the `cockroach sql` command:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
cockroach sql --url \
"postgresql://root@{node IP or hostname}:26257/?options=-ccluster=system&sslmode=verify-full" \
--certs-dir "certs"
~~~

#### Grant access to the system interface

To grant access to the system interface, you must connect to the system interface as a user with the `admin` role, then grant the `admin` role to the SQL user.

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}
To prevent unauthorized access, you should limit the users with access to the system interface.
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

## Observability

> When cluster virtualization is enabled, cluster logs and metrics are scoped to a virtual cluster or to the system interface.

Reviewer: We should probably say a bit more here, namely, that application level metrics are visible from the system interface, but not vice versa.  Additionally, SQL Activity and Jobs information is scoped to the tenant where the activity occurs.  More generally, if you want to see SQL Activity and Jobs information, you should look at them from the application VC.

### View cluster logs with cluster virtualization enabled

> When cluster virtualization is enabled, each cluster log is labeled with the name of a virtual cluster or with the system interface, depending on its scope.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When cluster virtualization is enabled, each cluster log entry is labeled with the name of a virtual cluster or with the system interface, depending on its scope.
```

### Restore a virtual cluster

{{site.data.alerts.callout_success}}
A virtual cluster can be restored to the original virtual cluster on the original storage cluster, a different virtual cluster on the original storage cluster, or a different virtual cluster on a different storage cluster with cluster virtualization enabled.
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

To restore only a single virtual cluster:

1. [Connect to the destination virtual cluster](#connect-to-a-virtual-cluster) as a user with the `admin` role on the virtual cluster.
1. [Restore the cluster]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/restore.md %}). Only the virtual cluster's data and settings are restored.

### Restore the entire cluster

To restore the entire storage cluster, including all virtual clusters and the system interface:

1. [Connect to the destination system interface](#connect-to-the-system-interface) as a user with the `admin` role on the system interface.
1. [Restore the cluster]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/restore.md %}) from a backup that included the the `INCLUDE_ALL_SECONDARY_TENANTS` flag. All virtual clusters and the system interface are restored.

### Cluster logs

> When cluster virtualization is enabled, cluster log messages for the system interface and each virtual cluster are labeled according to the cluster they are associated with.

Reviewer: Can we add an example here?

- When a cluster setting is system-visible, it can be set only from the system interface but can be queried from any virtual cluster. For example, virtual cluster can query a system-visible cluster setting's value to help adapt to the storage cluster's configuration.

For more details, including the scope of each cluster setting, refer to [Cluster Setting Scopes with Cluster Virtualization enabled]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-virtualization-setting-scopes.md %}).

## Upgrade a cluster

When cluster virtualization is enabled to upgrade to a new major version, you must:

1. Replace the binary on each node and restart the node.
1. [Finalize]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/upgrade-cockroach-version.md %}#step-6-finish-the-upgrade) the upgrade on the system interface to upgrade it, or roll back the upgrade if you decide not to finalize it. Until it is finalized, the cluster still operates in compatibility with the previous major version, and virtual clusters cannot be upgraded.

> 1. After the system interface is finalized, finalize the upgrade on the virtual cluster to upgrade it, or roll it back if you decide not to finalize it. Until it is finalized, the virtual cluster still operates in compatibility with the previous major version, some features may not be available on the virtual cluster.

Reviewer: We should probably note here that the `preserve_downgrade_option` cluster setting is scoped to each VC.  As a result, if users want to avoid the SI and VCs from upgrading automatically, they must set the cluster setting in both places.

This allows you to roll back an upgrade of the system interface without impacting schemas or data in virtual clusters. The system interface can be at most one major version ahead of virtual clusters. For example, when v24.1 is released, a system interface on CockroachDB v24.1 can have virtual clusters on CockroachDB v23.2.

> To apply a patch-version upgrade, you must only replace the binary on each node and restart the node. Finalization is not required. It is not possible for a virtual cluster to run a different patch version than the system interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To apply a patch-version upgrade, you must only replace the binary on each node and restart the node. Finalization is not required. 
```

I'd remove the last part.  They're running in the same binary, so this is somewhat implied.

1. [Connect to the destination system virtual cluster](#connect-to-the-system-virtual-cluster) as a user with the `admin` role on the system virtual cluster.
1. [Restore the cluster]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/restore.md %}) from a backup that included the the `INCLUDE_ALL_SECONDARY_VIRTUAL_CLUSTERS` flag. All virtual clusters and the system virtual cluster are restored.

### DB Console

In the DB Console, users with access to both the system virtual cluster and virtual clusters can select which cluster to connect to.

Some pages and views are only viewable from the system virtual cluster, including those pertaining to overall cluster health.

When connected to a virtual cluster, most pages and views are scoped to the virtual cluster. by default the DB Console displays only metrics about that virtual cluster, and excludes metrics for other virtual clusters and the system virtual cluster. To allow the DB Console to display system-level metrics from within a virtual cluster, you can grant the virtual cluster the `can_view_node_info` permission.

## Configure cluster settings

> When [cluster virtualization]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-virtualization-overview.md %}) is enabled, each [cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}) has a scope, which may be the virtual cluster or the system virtual cluster.

Reviewer 2: Similar comment here re articles preceding "virtual cluster" vs. "system virtual cluster"

- When a cluster setting is scoped to the virtual cluster, it affects only the virtual cluster and not the system virtual cluster. To configure a cluster setting that is scoped to the virtual cluster, you must have the `admin` role on the virtual cluster, and you must connect to the virtual cluster before configuring the setting. The majority of cluster settings are scoped to the virtual cluster and are visible only when connected to the virtual cluster.

> - When a cluster setting is scoped to the system virtual cluster, it effects the entire storage cluster. To configure a cluster setting that is scoped to the system virtual cluster, you must have the `admin` role on the system virtual cluster, and you must connect to the system virtual cluster before configuring the setting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When a cluster setting is scoped to the system virtual cluster, it affects the entire storage cluster. To configure a cluster setting that is scoped to the system virtual cluster, you must have the `admin` role on the system virtual cluster, and you must connect to the system virtual cluster before configuring the setting.
```

> - When a cluster setting is system-visible, it can be set only from the system virtual cluster but can be queried from any virtual cluster. For example, virtual cluster can query a system-visible cluster setting's value to help adapt to the storage cluster's configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When a cluster setting is system-visible, it can be set only from the system virtual cluster but can be queried from any virtual cluster. For example, a virtual cluster can query a system-visible cluster setting's value to help adapt to the storage cluster's configuration.
```

For more details, including the scope of each cluster setting, refer to [Cluster Setting Scopes with Cluster Virtualization enabled]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-virtualization-setting-scopes.md %}).

## Upgrade a cluster

When cluster virtualization is enabled to upgrade to a new major version, you must:

1. Replace the binary on each node and restart the node.
1. [Finalize]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/upgrade-cockroach-version.md %}#step-6-finish-the-upgrade) the upgrade on the system virtual cluster to upgrade it, or roll back the upgrade if you decide not to finalize it. Until it is finalized, the cluster still operates in compatibility with the previous major version, and virtual clusters cannot be upgraded.
1. After the system virtual cluster is finalized, finalize the upgrade on the virtual cluster to upgrade it, or roll it back if you decide not to finalize it. Until it is finalized, the virtual cluster still operates in compatibility with the previous major version, some features may not be available on the virtual cluster.

> This allows you to roll back an upgrade of the system virtual cluster without impacting schemas or data in virtual clusters. The system virtual cluster can be at most one major version ahead of virtual clusters. For example, when v24.1 is released, a system virtual cluster on CockroachDB v24.1 can have virtual clusters on CockroachDB v23.2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows you to roll back an upgrade of the system virtual cluster without impacting schemas or data in virtual clusters. The system virtual cluster can be at most one major version ahead of virtual clusters. For example, a system virtual cluster on CockroachDB v24.1 can have virtual clusters on CockroachDB v23.2.
```

---
title: Work with virtual clusters
summary: Learn how to connect to and work with virtual clusters.
toc: true
docs_area: deploy
---

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}
{% include feature-phases/preview.md %}

Refer to the [Cluster Virtualization Overview]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-virtualization-overview.md %}#known-limitations) for further detail.
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

> {% include_cached new-in.html version="v23.2" %} This page shows how to work with a cluster with [cluster virtualization]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-virtualization-overview.md %}).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{% include_cached new-in.html version="v23.2" %} This page is a guide to working with a CockroachDB cluster with [cluster virtualization]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-virtualization-overview.md %}) enabled.
```

Reviewer 2: Not sure of the exact language here, but defining how we will talk about **the** cluster when also talking about virtual clusters feels important. I assume this sentence meant the overarching CockroachDB cluster.

Author: Yeah, I think that way back in the beginning it was decided to refer to this as "with/without cluster virtualization enabled" so I went with that. Agree it is wordy and we should discuss with PM and Eng.

## Connect to a virtual cluster

This section shows how to use SQL clients or the DB Console to connect to a virtual cluster.

{% capture pcr_application_cluster_note %}
{{site.data.alerts.callout_success}}
When [Physical Cluster Replication]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/physical-cluster-replication-overview.md %}) is enabled, the default virtual cluster is named `application`.
{{site.data.alerts.end}}
{% endcapture %}

{{ pcr_application_cluster_note }}

> ### DB Console

Reviewer 2: I would switch around the DB Console and SQL clients sections here.

This section shows how to connect using DB Console when cluster virtualization is enabled.

> {{site.data.alerts.callout_success}}

Reviewer 2: General comment that this page is quite heavy on the tips/notes, I wonder if some of them could be consolidated into the body of the text.
